Concluding Words
 
The birth, activities and disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are not like the activities of ordinary mortals in this world. As stated in the fourth chapter of Bhagavad-gita, "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." One should not foolishly think the Mahabharata to be a fantasy made up by the imaginative minds of the great sages of old. The Mahabharata is pure fact. Vyasadeva, the literary incarnation of the Supreme Lord, wrote down the activities of the Lord and His devotees by virtue of His divine vision. Therefore, the Mahabharata and other Vedic literatures such as the Ramayana, Shrimad Bhagavatam, Upanishads and others are divinely inspired literatures and are meant to purify the mind and instill constant thought of the Supreme Lord. This is the final conclusion of this book. There are many editions of the Mahabharata which differ in small details, but the Siddhanta or conclusion is the most important ingredient. Whether Shishupala was killed with a Sudarshana discus or an arrow is not important. The important thing to understand is that Shishupala attained liberation from the cycle of birth and death. This summary study of the Mahabharata has taken the conclusions of the Shrimad Bhagavatam wherein many of the same pastimes are told. Originally the Mahabharata was written by Vyasadeva to attract the minds of the shudras, women and fallen twice born brahmanas. In it there are many descriptions of the heavenly planets and of fruitive activities. This summary study of the Mahabharata consists of the essence of spiritual life and concentrates on that theme. The essence is that Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and that we are all His servants. This Siddhanta has been stated in the eighteenth chapter of the Bhagavad-gita which is included in the Bhishma Parva of the Mahabharata. There Lord Krishna tells Arjuna, "Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are my very dear friend. Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear." Vyasadeva hoped that by reading the historical narrations of the Mahabharata common persons would be attracted to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gita. We have tried to present Mahabharata so that this conclusion is present on every page. I hope that the readers of this edition will enjoy the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotees the Pandavas, and remember the Supreme Lord Krishna by chanting the Hare Krishna Maha-mantra, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
